What is Morphology?
Mark Aronoff and
Kirsten Fudeman

1

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

1 Thinking about Morphology and
Morphological Analysis

1.1 What is Morphology?
1.2 Morphemes
1.3 Morphology in Action
1.3.1 Novel words and word play
1.3.2 Abstract morphological facts
1.4 Background and Beliefs
1.5 Introduction to Morphological Analysis
1.5.1 Two basic approaches: analysis and synthesis
1.5.2 Analytic principles
1.5.3 Sample problems with solutions
1.6 Summary
Introduction to Kujamaat Jóola

1
2
4
4
6
9
12
12
14
17
21
22

mor·phol·o·gy: a study of the structure or form of something
Merriam-Webster Unabridged

n 1.1 What is Morphology?
The term morphology is generally attributed to the German poet, novelist,
playwright, and philosopher Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832),
who coined it early in the nineteenth century in a biological context. Its
etymology is Greek: morph- means ‘shape, form’, and morphology is the
study of form or forms. In biology morphology refers to the study of the
form and structure of organisms, and in geology it refers to the study of
the conﬁguration and evolution of land forms. In linguistics morphology
refers to the mental system involved in word formation or to the branch

2

MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OO
LO
LO
GG
Y Y A NAD
N DM M
O ROPRHP O
H LOO
LG
O IGCI A
CL
ALAN
AN
AA
LY
LY
S ISSI S

of linguistics that deals with words, their internal structure, and how
they are formed.

n 1.2 Morphemes
A major way in which morphologists investigate words, their internal
structure, and how they are formed is through the identiﬁcation and study
of morphemes, often deﬁned as the smallest linguistic pieces with a grammatical function. This deﬁnition is not meant to include all morphemes,
but it is the usual one and a good starting point. A morpheme may consist
of a word, such as hand, or a meaningful piece of a word, such as the -ed
of looked, that cannot be divided into smaller meaningful parts. Another
way in which morphemes have been deﬁned is as a pairing between sound
and meaning. We have purposely chosen not to use this deﬁnition. Some
morphemes have no concrete form or no continuous form, as we will see,
and some do not have meanings in the conventional sense of the term.
You may also run across the term morph. The term ‘morph’ is sometimes used to refer speciﬁcally to the phonological realization of a
morpheme. For example, the English past tense morpheme that we spell
-ed has various morphs. It is realized as [t] after the voiceless [p] of jump
(cf. jumped), as [d] after the voiced [l] of repel (cf. repelled), and as [@d] after
the voiceless [t] of root or the voiced [d] of wed (cf. rooted and wedded).
We can also call these morphs allomorphs or variants. The appearance
of one morph over another in this case is determined by voicing and the
place of articulation of the ﬁnal consonant of the verb stem.
Now consider the word reconsideration. We can break it into three
morphemes: re-, consider, and -ation. Consider is called the stem. A stem is
a base morpheme to which another morphological piece is attached. The
stem can be simple, made up of only one part, or complex, itself made up
of more than one piece. Here it is best to consider consider a simple stem.
Although it consists historically of more than one part, most present-day
speakers would treat it as an unanalyzable form. We could also call consider
the root. A root is like a stem in constituting the core of the word to which
other pieces attach, but the term refers only to morphologically simple
units. For example, disagree is the stem of disagreement, because it is the base
to which -ment attaches, but agree is the root. Taking disagree now, agree is
both the stem to which dis- attaches and the root of the entire word.
Returning now to reconsideration, re- and -ation are both afﬁxes, which
means that they are attached to the stem. Afﬁxes like re- that go before
the stem are preﬁxes, and those like -ation that go after are sufﬁxes.

MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OL
OO
LG
OY
G YA N
AN
D D MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OL
OO
LG
O IGCI A
C LA L A N
AN
A LAYL SYISSI S

3

Some readers may wonder why we have not broken -ation down
further into two pieces, -ate and -ion, which function independently
elsewhere. In this particular word they do not do so (cf. *reconsiderate),
and hence we treat -ation as a single morpheme.
It is important to take very seriously the idea that the grammatical
function of a morpheme, which may include its meaning, must be constant. Consider the English words lovely and quickly. They both end with
the sufﬁx -ly. But is it the same in both words? No – when we add -ly to
the adjective quick, we create an adverb that describes how fast someone
does something. But when we add -ly to the noun love, we create an
adjective. What on the surface appears to be a single morpheme turns
out to be two. One attaches to adjectives and creates adverbs; the other
attaches to nouns and creates adjectives.
There are two other sorts of afﬁxes that you will encounter, inﬁxes
and circumﬁxes. Both are classic challenges to the notion of morpheme.
Inﬁxes are segmental strings that do not attach to the front or back of a
word, but rather somewhere in the middle. The Tagalog inﬁx -um- is
illustrated below (McCarthy and Prince 1993: 101–5; French 1988). It
creates an agent from a verb stem and appears before the ﬁrst vowel of
the word:
(1) Root
-um/sulat/
/s-um-ulat/
‘one who wrote’
/gradwet/ /gr-um-adwet/ ‘one who graduated’
The existence of inﬁxes challenges the traditional notion of a morpheme
as an indivisible unit. We want to call the stem sulat ‘write’ a morpheme,
and yet the inﬁx -um- breaks it up. Yet this seems to be a property of -umrather than one of sulat. Our deﬁnition of morphemes as the smallest
linguistic pieces with a grammatical function survives this challenge.
Circumﬁxes are afﬁxes that come in two parts. One attaches to the
front of the word, and the other to the back. Circumﬁxes are controversial because it is possible to analyze them as consisting of a preﬁx and a
sufﬁx that apply to a stem simultaneously. One example is Indonesian
ke . . . -an. It applies to the stem besar ‘big’ to form a noun ke-besar-an
meaning ‘bigness, greatness’ (MacDonald 1976: 63; Beard 1998: 62). Like
inﬁxes, the existence of circumﬁxes challenges the traditional notion
of morpheme (but not the deﬁnition used here) because they involve
discontinuity.
We will not go any more deeply here into classical problems with
morphemes, but the reader who would like to know more might consult
Anderson (1992: 51–6).

4

MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OO
LO
LO
GG
Y Y A NAD
N DM M
O ROPRHP O
H LOO
LG
O IGCI A
CL
ALAN
AN
AA
LY
LY
S ISSI S

n 1.3 Morphology in Action
We would like to explore the idea of morphology more deeply by
examining some data. These are examples of morphology in action –
morphological facts of everyday life.

n 1.3.1 Novel words and word play
If you had been walking down the street in Ithaca, New York, a few
years ago, you might have looked up and seen a sign for the music store
“Rebop,” a name that owes its inspiration to the jazz term rebop.1 Rebop
was originally one of the many nonsense expressions that jazz musicians
threw into their vocal improvisations, starting in the early 1920s. In the
1940s, rebop became interchangeable with bebop, a term of similar origin,
as the term for the rhythmically and harmonically eccentric music
played by young black musicians. By the 1950s the name of this musical
style was quite ﬁrmly established as simply bop.2 Today, the original use
of rebop is known only to cognoscenti, so that most people who pass
by the store will be likely to interpret the word as composed of the
word bop and the preﬁx re-, which means approximately ‘again’. This
preﬁx can attach only to verbs, so we must interpret bop as a verb here.
Rebop must therefore mean ‘bop again’, if it means anything at all.
And this music store, appropriately, specialized in selling used CDs.
There’s something going on here with English morphology. Of course,
rebop is not a perfectly well-formed English word. The verb bop means
something like ‘bounce’, but the preﬁx re- normally attaches only to a
verb whose meaning denotes an accomplishment. The verb rebop therefore makes little sense. But names of stores and products are designed
to catch the consumer’s attention, not necessarily to make sense, and
this one does so by exploiting people’s knowledge of English in a fairly
complex way and breaking the rules so as to attract attention, as verbal
art often does.
Consider now the following phrases, taken from a Toni Braxton song:
Unbreak my heart, uncry these tears.
We have never seen anyone unbreak something, and you certainly can’t
uncry tears, but every English speaker can understand these words. We
all know what it means to unbreak somebody’s heart or to wish that
one’s heart were unbroken. If we asked somebody, “unbreak my heart,”
we would be asking them to reverse the process of having our heart

MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OL
OO
LG
OY
G YA N
AN
D D MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OL
OO
LG
O IGCI A
C LA L A N
AN
A LAYL SYISSI S

5

broken. We can visualize “uncry these tears,” too – we just think of a ﬁlm
running backwards. We can understand these words because we know
the meaning of un-, which basically reverses or undoes an action. The
fact that these particular actions, breaking a heart and crying tears, cannot be reversed only adds poignancy to the song.
All human beings have this capacity for generating and understanding
novel words. Sometimes someone will create an entirely new word, as
J. R. R. Tolkien did when he coined the now-familiar term hobbit (which,
despite its popularity, is still not listed in the 2000 edition of the American Heritage Dictionary). But more often than not, we build new words
from pre-existing pieces, as with unbreak and uncry. We could easily go
on to create more words on this pattern.
Novel words are all around us. Jerry Seinfeld has talked about the
shushers, the shushees, and the unshushables in a movie theater. Morley
Safer was dubbed quirkologist – expert on quirky people – on a special
episode of 60 Minutes. For those who hate buffets, the TV character Frasier
Crane came up with the term smorgsaphobia. Finally, the longest novel
morphologically complex word we have been able to ﬁnd on our own in
the daily press is deinstitutionalization, from the New York Times.
These are everyday morphological facts, the kind you run across every
day as a literate speaker of English. What these words – rebop, unbreak,
uncry, hobbit, quirkologist, smorgsaphobia, and deinstitutionalization – have
in common is their newness. When we see or hear them, they leap out at
us, for the simple reason that we have probably never seen or heard
them before. It is interesting that novel words do this to us, because
novel sentences do not. When you hear a new sentence, you generally
don’t realize that this is the ﬁrst time that you’ve heard it. And you don’t
say to yourself, “What a remarkable sentence,” unless it happens to be
one from Proust or Joyce or some other verbal artist. Many people have
made the observation before that morphology differs from syntax in this
way. [Exercises 1–3]

Morphological challenge
As you work through this book, keep an eye – or an ear – out for novel or
otherwise striking words, on television, in magazines and newspapers, in books,
and in conversations. Keep a running list of them, then e-mail your list to the
authors: mark.aronoff@stonybrook.edu.

6

MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OO
LO
LO
GG
Y Y A NAD
N DM M
O ROPRHP O
H LOO
LG
O IGCI A
CL
ALAN
AN
AA
LY
LY
S ISSI S

n 1.3.2 Abstract morphological facts
Now let’s move to some more abstract morphological facts. These are the
kind of morphological facts that you don’t notice every day. They are so
embedded in your language that you don’t even think about them. They
are more common than the ones we have just looked at, but at the same
time deeper and more complex.
If you speak English and are concerned about your health, you might
say:
(2) I eat one melon a day.
Let’s imagine that we are even more concerned about our health than
you are. We don’t just eat one melon a day, rather:
(3) We eat two melons a day.
It is a fact about standard American or British English that we cannot
say:
(4) *We eat two melon a day.
However, if we were speaking Indonesian or Japanese, we would say
the equivalent of two melon (three melon, four melon, etc.) because these
languages don’t use morphological plurals in sentences like this.
(5) Indonesian:
Saiga makan dua buah semangka (se) tiap hari
I
eat
two fruit melon
every day
‘I eat two melons every day.’
Japanese:
mainichi futatsu-no meron-o tabemasu
every.day two- gen melon-obj eat.imperf
‘I eat two melons every day.’
The morphological grammar of English tells us that we have to put
an -s on melon whenever we are talking about more than one. This fact
of English is so transparent that native speakers don’t notice it. If we
happen to be speakers of a language without obligatory plural marking,
however, we will notice it because we are going to have a lot of trouble
with it.
We have now observed something about English morphology. If
a word is plural, it takes the sufﬁx -s. Living creatures don’t eat only
melons, however:

MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OL
OO
LG
OY
G YA N
AN
D D MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OL
OO
LG
O IGCI A
C LA L A N
AN
A LAYL SYISSI S

7

(6) The evil giant at the top of the beanstalk eats two melons, three ﬁsh,
and four children a day.
Everyone agrees that ﬁsh is plural, but there is no plural marker. Children
is also plural, but it has a very unusual plural sufﬁx, -ren, plus an internal
change: we say [TIld-] instead of [Tajld]. In other words, it’s not always
the case that we mark plural words with an s-like thing; there are other
ways in which we can mark plurals. Native speakers of English know
this, and they do not need to think about it before making a plural.
[Exercise 4]
Consider the following:
(7) Today they claim that they will ﬁx the clock tower by Friday, but
yesterday they claimed that it would take at least a month.
In this example, we use two different forms of the verb claim. One
is present tense, and the other is past. Again, this is not true for all
languages. If we were speaking Vietnamese, for example, we wouldn’t
make any distinction between claim and claimed – we wouldn’t mark
the verb at all. If we were speaking Chinese, we would not distinguish
between claim and claimed in a sentence like this, because the adverb
zuótian ‘yesterday’ is sufﬁcient to indicate past tense:
(8) jintian tamen shuo tamen xingqi wä ké yà xiu hÜo zhonglóu,
today they say they Friday
can ﬁx well clock.tower
ká shì zuótian tamen què
shuo zhì shÜo xu yào yíge yuè
but yesterday they however say at least need a
month
‘Today they claim that they will ﬁx the clock tower by Friday, but
yesterday they claimed that it would take at least a month.’
If we were to leave out zuótian ‘yesterday’, we would need to use the
particle le after the verb to show that the action took place in the past.
In other words, whether or not a speaker must indicate past tense in
Chinese depends on context.
Notice what happens in English when we use some other verbs besides claim:
(9) Today they say . . . but yesterday they said . . .
tell us
told us
know
knew
That these verbs and others do not add -t, -d, or -@d to make their past
tense is an elementary fact about English morphology. We’ll talk more
about verbs like these later in the chapter.

8

MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OO
LO
LO
GG
Y Y A NAD
N DM M
O ROPRHP O
H LOO
LG
O IGCI A
CL
ALAN
AN
AA
LY
LY
S ISSI S

The next observation about English morphology has to do with pronouns. The following is a real exchange between an American mother
and her 6-year-old son:
(10) Who just threw a pool ball through the basement window?
Not me.
In this context, the 6-year-old (who was indeed guilty) would never have
responded Not I. But if he were to answer with a sentence, the response
would be I didn’t, not Me didn’t. In that case, the object form of the
pronoun would be ungrammatical. Without formally knowing anything
at all about subjects and objects, English-speaking 6-year-olds (and
children even younger) master the pronoun system of their language.
[Exercise 5]
Given the following sentence, how many children does Joan have?
(11) All of Joan’s children are brilliant and play musical instruments
surpassingly well.
From this statement you cannot know how many children Joan has, but
one thing is certain: she has more than two. If Joan had only two children, we would normally say both of Joan’s children, because it is a fact
about English that there is a morphological distinction among universal
quantiﬁers between the one designating all of two (both) or all of more
than two (all) of a particular type of entity. In some other languages,
marking for dual is even more pervasive. This is the case in Ancient
Greek, as shown by the following examples:
(12) ho
stratiô:tes
lambánei tous
híppous
the.nom.sg soldier.nom.sg take.3sg the.acc.pl horses.acc.pl
‘The soldier takes the horses.’
to:
stratió:ta
lambáneton tous
híppous
the.nom.du soldier.nom.du take.du
the.acc.pl horses.acc.pl
‘The two soldiers take the horses.’
hoi
stratiô:tai lambánousi tous
híppous
the.m.pl soldier.pl take.3pl
the.acc.pl horses.acc.pl
‘The soldiers (three or more) take the horses.’
While English does not have special afﬁxes to mark the dual, it keeps
track of the distinction through words like all and both. There are actually
languages in the world like Manam (Papua New Guinea: Gregersen 1976)
and Larike (Central Maluku, Indonesia: Laidig and Laidig 1990) that
distinguish not only singular, dual, and plural, but trial as well. The use

MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OL
OO
LG
OY
G YA N
AN
D D MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OL
OO
LG
O IGCI A
C LA L A N
AN
A LAYL SYISSI S

9

of singular, dual, trial, and plural second person subject preﬁxes in Larike
is illustrated below:
(13) Airala
iterlawa pe?a- o ?
2sg.sub- chop.down 1pl.incl.sub- garden ﬁnish- qm
‘Did you (sg.) ﬁnish clearing our garden?’
Kalu au?anu, irua musti
iruai?anu si?u.
if
1sg.sub- eat 2du certainly 2du.sub- eat also
‘If I eat, certainly you both will eat too.’
Kalu iriduta- ?eu, auna- wela.
if
2tri.sub- neg- go 1sg.sub-irr- go.home
‘If you three don’t want to go, I’m going home.’
Memang irihise tapi imita- ?ari?itruly
3pl.nonhum- exist but 2pl.sub-neg- seeri.
3pl.nonhum.obj
‘They really do exist, but you (plural) didn’t see them.’

n 1.4

Background and Beliefs

This book is a general introduction to morphology and morphological
analysis from the point of view of a morphologist. The purpose is
not to advocate any particular theory or to give the truth (whatever that
is), but rather to get you, the reader, to where you can look for it by
yourself. Still, it is inevitable that some of our remarks will be colored
by our own beliefs and background. We would therefore like to present some of our foundational beliefs about linguistics and linguistic
methodology.
First, we believe that languages differ from one another. You might
be thinking, “Of course they do!” But we mean this in a very special way.
Some linguists are always looking for ways that languages are similar,
and at times, we do that, too. But we believe that if you focus only on the
similarities between languages, you miss out on all of the exciting ways
in which they differ. What’s more, you may ﬁnd parallels and similarities
where none really exist. We try to approach linguistic analysis with as
open a mind as possible, and to do this, it is ﬁrst necessary to appreciate
the uniqueness and diversity of the world’s languages.
Our second foundational belief is that languages, which we can write
with a small l, are different from Language, with a capital L. There are

10

MORPHOLOGY

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

thousands of individual languages in the world. But we may also speak
of language in general to mean the general phenomenon of Language
that encompasses all individual languages. This Language is related
to Noam Chomsky’s notion of Universal Grammar, which posits that
languages are all alike in basic ways. There is an important distinction
between these two uses of the word language and each is equally important to linguistics. Individual languages have features that are not characteristic of Language in general. For example, one feature of English is
that its regular way of forming plural nouns is to add /z/. We would
never claim, however, that this is universally true, or that it is a property
of Language. To tie this belief in with the preceding one, we strongly
believe that morphological theory and morphological analysis must be
grounded in morphological description. If we want to appreciate what
morphology really is, it’s best to have some idea of what the morphology
of individual languages is like. At the same time, we must have a reasonably well-thought-out general theory of the morphology of Language, so
that we can compare our descriptions of individual languages within a
wider context. In short, linguists need to pay equal attention to both
small-l language and capital-L Language.
Our next belief is that morphology is a distinct component of languages or grammars. If you are not already familiar with some of the
controversy surrounding morphology, this needs an explanation. The
fact that some languages, such as Vietnamese, do not have morphologically complex words has led some people to conclude that morphology
should not be a separate branch of linguistics. The reasoning is that linguistics is generally understood to deal with properties of all languages –
more precisely, Language with a capital L. If there are languages that
don’t have morphology, then morphology is not a property of all languages, and morphological phenomena should be treated in syntax or
phonology. We disagree. It has been shown elsewhere (e.g., Aronoff 1994)
that there are aspects of morphology that cannot be attributed to syntax
or phonology, or anything else.
One piece of evidence that morphology is separate from syntax, phonology, and other branches of linguistics is that words in some languages
are grouped into largely arbitrary classes that determine their forms in
different environments. Latin nouns fall into ﬁve distinct classes, called
declensions, which have little or nothing to do with syntax or phonology,
and certainly cannot be explained by either. They are purely morphological in their signiﬁcance. The uniquely morphological nature of these
classes is truly brought home by the fact that Latin nouns also fall into

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

11

syntactic agreement classes (usually called genders) and the two systems
cross-cut one another: two nouns may belong to the same gender but to
different declensions and vice versa. We’ll examine cases like these in
later chapters, but their mere existence in many languages shows that
morphology must be given some independent status in linguistics. Of
course, morphology, probably more than any other component of language, interacts with all the rest, but it still has properties of its own.
We also believe that morphologies are systems. This is a very old
observation. Because of it, it is impossible to talk about isolated facts in
a language – everything holds together. This belief together with the
second one, above, are the reasons why we’ll be looking carefully at the
morphology of a particular language, Kujamaat Jóola, throughout this
book. Considering the morphology of Kujamaat Jóola in close to its
entirety will give us a valuable perspective that we would never gain if
we only focused on isolated facts from several languages.
So far, we have given you our beliefs about the nature of language and
morphology. We also have some that pertain to methodology. The ﬁrst is
that we should take an attitude of skeptical realism. Albert Einstein said
that a physicist must be both a realist and a nominalist, a realist in the
sense that you must believe that what you ultimately ﬁnd will be real,
but a nominalist in the sense that you must never believe that you’ve
found what you’re looking for. Martin Joos made a similar statement
about linguistics. On the one hand, you should always believe that what
you are looking for is God’s truth, but on the other, you should consider
all that you have found so far as hocus-pocus. We believe strongly in the
value of having a linguistic theory, but we believe equally strongly that
you should never trust it completely.
Our other methodological belief can be summed up as a motto: Anything goes. This methodological belief is associated with the Against
Method of Paul Feyerabend, a twentieth-century philosopher who felt
that if we insisted on a single rule of scientiﬁc methodology, one that
would not inhibit progress, it would be “Anything goes.” We take a
no-holds-barred approach to linguistics. We’ll use any tool or method
that will tell us how language works. This attitude stems in part from
our skepticism about particular theories. People who are wedded to individual theories tend to believe in using tools that are rooted in that
theory. Our tools are not theory-based in that way. If a tool does the job,
we are happy to use it, whether it is a traditional linguistic tool (e.g.,
native speaker consultants, dictionaries, written grammars), an experimental tool (e.g., imaging technology), or a statistical tool.

12

MORPHOLOGY

n 1.5

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

Introduction to Morphological Analysis

n 1.5.1 Two basic approaches: analysis and synthesis
There are two complementary approaches to morphology, analytic and
synthetic. The linguist needs both.
The analytic approach has to do with breaking words down, and it is
usually associated with American structuralist linguistics of the ﬁrst half
of the twentieth century. There is a good reason for this. These linguists
were often dealing with languages that they had never encountered before,
and there were no written grammars of these languages to guide them.
It was therefore crucial that they should have very explicit methods of
linguistic analysis. No matter what language we’re looking at, we need
analytic methods that will be independent of the structures we are examining; preconceived notions might interfere with an objective, scientiﬁc
analysis. This is especially true when dealing with unfamiliar languages.
The second approach to morphology is more often associated with
theory than with methodology, perhaps unfairly. This is the synthetic
approach. It basically says, “I have a lot of little pieces here. How do I put
them together?” This question presupposes that you already know what
the pieces are. So in a sense, analysis in some way must precede synthesis.
Say that you’ve broken a clock and taken it apart, and now you have
to put all the little pieces back together. There’s a catch: you don’t know
how. You could always go by trial and error. But the most efﬁcient way
would be to have some theory of how the clock goes together. Synthesis
really involves theory construction.
From a morphological point of view, the synthetic question you ask is,
“How does a speaker of a language produce a grammatically complex
word when needed?” This question already assumes that you know what
kinds of elementary pieces you are making the complex word out of. We
think that one of the real problems of a morphological theory is that we
don’t always have a good idea of what the pieces are. Syntacticians can
supply us with some tools: case and number, for example, are ancient
syntactic notions that we can use in our morphology. But the primary
way in which morphologists determine the pieces they are dealing with is
by examination of language data. They must pull words apart carefully,
taking great care to note where each piece came from to begin with.
We have described analysis and synthesis in terms of the morphologist
studying language, but the two notions are equally applicable to speakers
themselves. Speakers apply morphological analysis when they read or

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

13

hear a complex word that they have never encountered before. In order
to understand it, they pull it apart and ask themselves whether they
recognize any of the pieces. Speakers use synthesis whenever they create
new forms from pre-existing pieces.

Read the caption in the following Motorola ad carefully. It contains an example
of morphology in action – a striking morphological fact. Comment on it,
relating it to the discussion of analytic and synthetic approaches to wordformation.

Who’d of thought that an electronic chip inside your car could help you
avoid curbs, other cars, and best of all, Earl in repair.

14

MORPHOLOGY

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

n 1.5.2 Analytic principles
Before we encounter any actual problems, we would like to give you
some basic analytic principles used in morphology. They are taken from
Eugene Nida’s (1949; revised edition 1965) textbook Morphology.3
The ﬁrst principle is given in (14):
(14) Principle 1
Forms with the same meaning and the same sound shape in all
their occurrences are instances of the same morpheme.
Step one in morphological analysis is to look for elements that have the
same form and the same meaning. This is the basic type-token problem.
Let’s say that we have a bunch of coins. Each is a token, a form. If we
look at them carefully, we see that three of them look very much the
same (they are all nickels), and two of them are identical – they both say
1997. These two coins are tokens of exactly the same type: they have
identical forms and identical values. We may further say that the three
coins are all tokens of a larger type that includes all nickels, not just those
minted in 1997. But ﬁve pennies, though they have the same value as a
nickel, do not together comprise the same type as the nickel, because,
although identical in value to the nickel, they are different in form.

Divide the following forms into morphemes. (For answers, turn the page.)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

password
sprayable
childhoods
autobiography
co-educational

To apply this distinction between types and tokens to the morphological analysis of words, consider the Spanish words buenísimo ‘very good’
(< bueno ‘good’), riquísimo ‘very delicious’ (< rico ‘delicious’), and utilísimo
‘very useful’ (< útil ‘useful’). In each case, the sufﬁx -ísimo contributes
the same superlative meaning, and it has the same shape. We logically
conclude that the sufﬁx is the same for all three words. Note that we
presented three words, all with the same sufﬁx. It is not enough to look
at one form when attempting to break it up into its smaller parts. One
thing that makes a morpheme a morpheme is that it recurs, and thus
speakers are able to identify it and give it a meaning. [Exercises 6– 8]

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

15

This isn’t the whole story, as Principle 2 tells us:
(15) Principle 2
Forms with the same meaning but different sound shapes may
be instances of the same morpheme if their distributions do not
overlap.
In Kujamaat Jóola, for example, the stem /baj-/ has two possible shapes,
[baj-] and [b@j-], but their distributions don’t overlap. [b@j-] occurs in the
presence of a morpheme with an underlyingly tense vowel, but [baj-]
does not. This non-overlapping distribution allows us to conclude that
the two forms are instances of the same morpheme. When two or more
instances of a given morpheme occur with different shapes, we call them
allomorphs. Allomorphs were introduced above in section 1.2.
The regular plural marker in English has several allomorphs –
voiceless alveolar fricative /s/, voiced alveolar fricative /z/, schwa
plus voiced alveolar fricative /z/, syllabic alveolar nasal /n/, and Ø –
as shown in (16):
(16) seat-/s/
shade-/z/
hedg-/@z/
ox-/y/
ﬁsh-Ø
As in the previous example, the distributions of these forms do not overlap, and they all have the same meaning. We can infer that they are
instances of the same morpheme.
(17) Principle 3
Not all morphemes are segmental.
Normally, when we think of morphemes, we think of forms that can be
pronounced in some sense, e.g., chicken, the, un-, -ize. But some morphemes
can’t be pronounced on their own. They are dependent on other morphemes for their realization. In English, for example, vowel alternations
may serve to differentiate basic and past forms of the verb. We refer to
these alternations as ablaut (as in 18):
(18) run
ran
speak spoke
eat
ate
We know that there is a past tense marker distinguishing the words in
the second column from those in the ﬁrst. But what is it? It is not the /æ/

16

MORPHOLOGY

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

Answers to morpheme-breakup exercise:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

pass/word
spray/able
child/hood/s
auto/bio/graph/y
co-/educ/at/ion/al

of ran or the /o/ of spoke but rather the difference between these vowels
and the vowels of the basic verb, which is not segmental at all. We must
look at both the present and past tense forms of these verbs, because it
is the contrast between them that is important. Another type of nonsegmental morpheme in English is shown in (19):
(19) breathN
clothN
houseN

breatheV
clotheV
houseV

In each pair, the noun ends in a voiceless fricative ([T, s]), while the verb
ends in a voiced fricative ([D, z]). Assuming that the noun is basic, we say
that the morpheme that marks the verbs consists of the phonological
feature [+voice]. [Exercise 9]
Although Principle 3 says that we can apply the term morpheme to
the non-segmental alternations seen in (18) and (19), it is nonetheless the
case that doing so is awkward. Pairs like run∼ ran or breath∼ breathe are
more easily explained as processes than as concatenation of morphemes.
In the next chapter we will further address this issue. In section 1.2 we
brieﬂy mentioned classical problems with morphemes in the context of
inﬁxation and circumﬁxation. The existence of non-segmental alternations
such as those in (18) and (19) is another classical problem.
The contrast between forms was crucial in (18) and (19). The notion of
contrast can be further extended, leading to Principle 4:
(20) Principle 4
A morpheme may have zero as one of its allomorphs provided it
has a non-zero allomorph.
Fish is an example of a word with a zero plural: one ﬁsh, two ﬁsh-Ø.
We can say that it has a zero plural, and that this zero plural is an
allomorph of the usual plural [z], because other words in the language,
like frogs, have non-zero plurals. This is an analytic procedure, not a
theoretical point. We cannot posit a zero unless it contrasts with some

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

17

non-zero variant. In Japanese, where sakana means both ‘ﬁsh (sg)’ and
‘ﬁsh (pl)’, we cannot posit a zero plural (*sakana-Ø) because nowhere in
the language does -ØPL contrast with a non-zero allomorph. [Exercises
10 –11]

n 1.5.3 Sample problems with solutions
Now that you have been introduced to some principles of morphological
analysis, let us examine a data set. This one comes from the Veracruz
dialect of Aztec, spoken in Mexico, and is taken from Nida (1965: 11):
(21) Aztec
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.

ikalwewe
ikalsosol
ikalci·n
komitwewe
komitsosol
komitci·n
petatwewe
petatsosol

‘his big house’
‘his old house’
‘his little house’
‘big cooking-pot’
‘old cooking-pot’
‘little cooking-pot’
‘big mat’
‘old mat’

i.
petatci·n
‘little mat’
j.
ikalmeh
‘his houses’
k. komitmeh
‘cooking-pots’
l.
petatmeh
‘mats’
m. ko·yameci·n
‘little pig’
n. ko·yamewewe ‘big male pig’
o. ko·yameilama ‘big female pig’
p. ko·yamemeh
‘pigs’

Our task is to list all the morphemes and to give the meaning of each.
Before reading the following discussion, try this out on your own. Then,
if you run into trouble or want to check your answers, read on.
We begin by looking for recurring pieces that have a consistent meaning or function. In this, the English glosses of each form are very useful.
Consider (21a–c, j). All have something to do with ‘house’, and more
speciﬁcally, ‘his house(s)’. Examining the forms carefully we ﬁnd that
they all contain the piece ikal-, but have nothing else in common. We
deduce from this that ikal- means ‘his house’. We include a hyphen after
ikal- because since it never appears on its own, we cannot know if Aztec
requires that it be sufﬁxed. The data set does not contain any other
examples with an English gloss of ‘his’ or another possessive pronoun;
nor does it contain any examples meaning ‘house’ without the possessor
‘his’. This means that we cannot break ikal- up further.
Form (21a) ikalwewe ‘his big house’ contains the additional piece -wewe.
Looking over the rest of the data, we ﬁnd that -wewe also occurs in
(21g) petatwewe ‘big mat’, (21d) komitwewe ‘big cooking-pot’, and (21n)
ko·yamewewe ‘big male pig’. All of these also contain the meaning ‘big’.
We conclude that -wewe means ‘big’. Again we use the hyphen because
in this particular data set, -wewe always appears attached to the stem.

18

MORPHOLOGY

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

One form contains the meaning ‘big’ but not the morpheme -wewe.
This is (21o) ko·yameilama ‘big female pig’. We recognize the piece ko·yame‘pig’, which also appears in (21m–n, p). Based on the minimal data we
have, we can only deduce that like -wewe, -ilama means ‘big’, but that it
attaches only to a certain class of noun. Both (21o) ko·yameilama ‘big female
pig’ and (21n) ko·yamewewe ‘big male pig’ appear to have the same stem,
but since one refers to a female animal and the other to a male animal,
such a situation would not be unprecedented.
Based on (21b–c) ikalsosol ‘his old house’ and ikalci·n ‘his little house’
we isolate the pieces -sosol ‘old’ and -ci·n ‘little’. This analysis is afﬁrmed
when we look at other words in the data set, such as (21e–f) komitsosol
‘old cooking-pot’ and komitci·n ‘little cooking-pot’, which contain the same
pieces. We can also isolate komit- ‘cooking-pot’.
In all, we can isolate the following morphemes:
(22) ikal‘his house’
komit‘cooking-pot’
ko·yame- ‘pig’
petat‘mat’
-ci·n
‘little’
-sosol
‘old’
-ilama
‘big’ (occurs with stem meaning ‘female pig’)
-wewe
‘big’ (occurs with stems meaning ‘his house’, ‘cookingpot’, ‘mat’, ‘male pig’)
-meh
plural marker
This exercise was fairly simple in the sense that there were no
allomorphs, and the morphology was entirely morphemic – it did not
interact with any non-segmental phenomena. However, there were a few
difﬁculties. One was the fact that we did not have enough data to break
up ikal- ‘his house’, and yet, since the English gloss clearly has two parts,
you may have been tempted to break it into two parts, too. A second
difﬁculty was the presence of both -ilama and -wewe ‘big’. Again, we
did not have enough data to understand fully what their difference is.
Occasionally uncertainty is something that morphologists have to accept
when working with published data sets and written grammars. Sometimes there are gaps in what is presented. Morphologists doing ﬁeld
research have the advantage of native speaker consultants whom they
can ask. But in order to ask the right questions, it is important that
morphologists alternate data collection with data analysis and not wait
to get back home to analyze their ﬁndings.

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

19

A ﬁnal observation is that this data set was not presented in the IPA.
For example, you probably were not familiar with Nida’s convention for
marking long vowels: a raised dot, as in -ci·n ‘little’. This fact in itself should
not have posed any problems. It is often possible to isolate morphemes,
particularly when there are no allomorphs or phonological interactions
between them, whether or not we fully understand the transcription
system. That was the case here. However, the use of a non-standard
transcription system may make a problem set seem more daunting.
As explained in the prefatory remarks to this book, we chose to retain
non-standard transcription systems despite the difﬁculties they present
because as a linguist you will be faced with them time and time again.
We hope that the experience you gain in this book will help you deal
with such systems in your own research.
Our next sample problem set comes from French. It addresses different
issues than the Aztec data discussed above. The French adjectives in the
ﬁrst column are masculine, and those in the second are feminine. Your
task is to determine how masculine and feminine adjectives are differentiated and to outline a possible analysis. You may ignore changes in
vowel quality.
(23)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
m.
n.

Masculine
gros [g‰o]
mauvais [movE]
heureux [ø‰ø]
petit [p@ti]
grand [g‰Ñ]
froid [f‰wa]
soûl [su]
bon [bõ]
frais [f‰E]
long [lõ]
premier [p‰œmje]
entier [Ñtje]
gentil [ZÑti]
net [nEt]

Feminine
grosse [g‰os]
mauvaise [movEz]
heureuse [ø‰øz]
petite [p@tit]
grande [g‰Ñd]
froide [f‰wad]
soûle [sul]
bonne [bOn]
fraîche [f‰ES]
longue [lõg]
première [p‰œmjE‰]
entière [ÑtjE‰]
gentille [ZÑtij]
nette [nEt]

‘fat’
‘bad’
‘happy’
‘small’
‘big’
‘cold’
‘drunk’
‘good’
‘fresh’
‘long’
‘ﬁrst’
‘entire’
‘kind’
‘clean’

As with the Aztec set, you should limit yourself to the data provided,
although some of you may know French.
One way to begin is to see whether there is a single morpheme, which
may or may not have allomorphs, that signals the difference between
masculine and feminine. There is not. Masculine and feminine adjectives
are differentiated by an alternation between Ö and [s] in (23a), Ö and [z]

20

MORPHOLOGY

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

in (23b–c), Ö and [t] in (23d), Ö and [d] in (23e–f ), Ö and [l] in (23g), Ö and
[n] in (23h), Ö and [S] in (23i), Ö and [g] in (23j), Ö and [‰] in (23k–l), and
Ö and [j] in (23m). The masculine and feminine forms of [nEt] ‘clean’ are
identical. (It is important to focus on pronunciation and not spelling.
Spelling conventions are not part of the mental grammar.) We cannot
consider the many ﬁnal sounds of the feminine forms to be allomorphs
of one another. Phonetically, they are extremely varied. Their distribution overlaps, too. For example, we ﬁnd both [S] and [z] after [E], in (23i)
fraîche ‘fresh’ (f ) and (23b) mauvaise ‘bad’ (f ), respectively. There is no
apparent reason why (23n) net, nette ‘clean’ should behave differently
from the other words in the list in having only one form [nEt].
You may be thinking that the spelling can account for the ﬁnal sound
of the feminine forms. However, spelling often reﬂects the history of a
word and not its synchronic analysis. Therefore, we cannot base our
analysis on it.
So far it appears as if the ﬁnal sound of the feminine forms of the
adjectives is arbitrary. And yet, it cannot be wholly arbitrary, or speakers
would not know which form the feminine takes. We have been treating
this problem until now as if the feminine form is derived from the masculine one. A second possibility is that the opposite is true. We can form
a hypothesis: perhaps the masculine form results when we remove the
ﬁnal sound of the feminine. This accounts for (23a–m). (Recall that we
asked you to ignore changes in vowel quantity.) But this hypothesis fails
when we apply it to (23n) net, nette ‘clean’. Both are pronounced [nEt].
Our current hypothesis, that we arrive at the masculine form by subtracting the last segment of the feminine form, cannot account for this fact.
At this point in the problem, you need to make a new hypothesis.
There is room for more than one. One is that in French, adjectives have
more than one stem, and both the masculine and feminine stems need to
be memorized. This would mean that for (23b) mauvais, mauvaise, speakers
memorize that the ﬁrst is pronounced [movE] and the second [movEz].
A second reasonable hypothesis is that we were on the right track earlier,
and that speakers arrive at the masculine form by dropping the ﬁnal
segment of the feminine form. The feminine form is the only one that
needs to be memorized, then, since the masculine can be derived from it
by a regularly applying rule. Under this hypothesis, (23n) net, nette ‘clean’,
both pronounced [nEt], is an exception that speakers must memorize.
Many would consider the fact that, based on our data set, this hypothesis
requires speakers to memorize fewer forms to be an advantage.
We may not have arrived at a single, neat solution to the French data,
but we have analyzed them and presented the hypotheses that they

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

21

suggest carefully. Presentation is important whenever you undertake to
solve a linguistics problem. We close this section with a few tips for
writing one up. First, when you include examples from a data set in the
text of your analysis, set them off by underlining them or using italics,
as we have done. Second, whenever you present a foreign-language form,
provide its gloss, or deﬁnition. The most standard linguistic practice is to
put the gloss in single quotation marks, like this: ‘deﬁnition’. Finally, be
sure you know what the problem is asking. If the problem asks for a list
of morphemes, for example, that is all you need to provide (but don’t
forget to give their glosses, as well). If the problem asks for your analysis, present it carefully, as we have done above. In order to make
your answer more compelling, you may need to explore analyses that do
not work, as well. This is what we did in examining the French data.
[Exercises 12–14]

n 1.6

Summary

We have given a whirlwind introduction to the ﬁeld of morphology and
to some of the phenomena that morphologists study. We introduced
a key notion, that of the morpheme, but acknowledged that there are
problems with its traditional formulation. We presented some basic
beliefs of ours that underlie this and other chapters of the book, as well
as four principles that will help the reader undertake morphological analysis. Finally, we led the reader through two sample problems in order
to illustrate the steps a morphologist must take when analyzing data, as
well as possible stumbling blocks that he or she might encounter.
We next turn to an introduction to Kujamaat Jóola, the language we
have chosen to examine and analyze throughout this volume.

22

MORPHOLOGY

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

n Introduction to Kujamaat Jóola
The Kujamaat Jóola people (who call themselves Kujamaat and their
language Kujamutay) live in the Basse-Casamance region of Senegal,
West Africa. Jóola is a cluster of dialects, of which Kujamaat, sometimes
called Foñy, and Kasa are the most important.4 The total number of
speakers in 1998 was about 186,000 (Grimes 2002). Kujamaat Jóola belongs to the Atlantic (sometimes called West Atlantic) language family,
of which the best-known languages are Wolof, the national language
of Senegal, and Fula. Looked at in terms of linguistic history, the
Atlantic languages form a branch descending from the most widespread language family in Africa, Niger-Congo, which is also one of
the largest language families in the world. Kujamaat Jóola has a number
of features – most particularly its intricate system of noun classes and
agreement – which are remarkably similar to those of the distantly
related but much larger and better-known subfamily of Niger-Congo, the
Bantu languages.
The most pervasive and characteristic morphological features of
Kujamaat Jóola are (i) a simple and elegant vowel harmony system,
(ii) an extensive noun class or gender system, (iii) rich agreement morphology, and (iv) agglutinative verbal morphology. Over the course of this
book we will be exploring these and other topics in Kujamaat Jóola
morphology as they relate to issues raised in individual chapters.
We have chosen Kujamaat Jóola for this book because its morphology,
though complex and sometimes unusual, is highly regular, which makes
it an excellent teaching vehicle. The morphology is also spread out across
nouns, verbs, and adjectives. The inﬂection includes some of the most
common types that one is likely to ﬁnd: nominal gender, agreement,
and verbal tense and aspect. Finally, there is J. David Sapir’s superb
grammar, from which most of the Kujamaat Jóola data in this book are
drawn, which provides a wonderfully lucid description of the language
and especially of the morphology. The grammar has also stood the test of
time: it speaks to us as clearly today as it did when it was written almost
forty years ago.
Of all the distinct aspects of language, morphology is the most deeply
entwined with the others. There is no way to talk about morphology
without also talking about phonology, syntax, semantics, and pragmatics. Phonology is especially important, for there is no way to get at the
morphology of a language without ﬁrst stripping away the effects of
phonology on the forms of words. For that reason our introduction to

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

23

Kujamaat Jóola morphology must be preceded by a brief overview of its
phonology. Treatment of Kujamaat Jóola vowel harmony can be found in
chapter 3.
The phonemic inventory of Kujamaat Jóola is given in (1) and (2).5
Kujamaat Jóola has a set of voiceless and voiced stops in three places of
articulation – bilabial, alveolar, and velar – and nasal consonants in four
– bilabial, alveolar, palatal, and velar. It has voiceless and voiced
postalveolar affricates /T/ and /D /, transcribed here as <c> and <j>
(following Sapir 1965), voiceless labiodental and alveolar fricatives /f/
and /s/, two liquids /l/ and /r/, and labiovelar and palatal glides /w/
and /y/. The voiceless glottal fricative /h/ rarely occurs.
(1) Consonants
labial alveolar palatal velar
p
t
k
b
d
g
m
n
ê
è
c
j
f
s
l
r
(w)
y
(w)

glottal

h

Vowels occur in tense–lax pairs and may be short or long; what Sapir
represents as schwa is realized as “a tense unrounded high-mid central
vowel” under stress (Sapir 1965: 6), and is the tense counterpart to /a/.
Tense high vowels are underscored (i and u). The lax counterparts of
tense /e/ and /o/ are /E/ and /O/ respectively:
(2) Vowels (all may be either long and short)
u u
i i
e
@
o
E
O
a
The organization of this vowel chart follows standard linguistic practice.
It reﬂects the position of the tongue during articulation and resonance,
with the high vowels [i, i, u, u] at the top of the triangle, and the low
vowel [a] at the bottom. Vowels on the left are articulated toward the
front of the vocal tract, and those on the right farther back.
Kujamaat Jóola words showing all of the vowels are listed in (3):

24

MORPHOLOGY

(3) b@sik@n
k@si:t
gis
i:s
ebe
-fe:gir
EfEl
EfE:l
ek@l
ek@:l
kafa:lEn
EgOl
EgO:l
fuko
fuko:k
Ekuk
Eku:ku
k@kukul
k@ku:ku:l

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

‘mortar’
‘feather’
‘tear’
‘show’
‘cow’
‘three’
‘to untie’
‘to annoy’
‘type of antelope’
‘to be partially ripe’
‘to continue’
‘stick’
‘corner’
‘head’
‘wall’
‘to take big handfuls’
‘mouse’
‘to cultivate in dry ground’
‘type of tree’

Nasal–nasal and nasal–consonant clusters are very common. Of
these, only /mb/ and /nd/ occur freely, including at the beginning of a
word; /nn/, /mf/ (transcribed here as <nf>, following Sapir), and /ns/
clusters occur only word-internally. The remaining clusters can occur in
either internal or ﬁnal position in a word. In all cases the two consonants have the same place of articulation. Both /lt/ and /rt/ occur in
word-internal position, as well, though very rarely. There are no other
consonant clusters. Some examples are given in (4):6
(4) k@gu:mp
mba
nimammaè
-buntEn
nicEêcEè
-maêj
aèkaèk
emuèguno
fanfaè
ndaw
-saltE
-@rti

‘ashes’
‘or’
‘I want’
‘cause to lie’
‘I asked’
‘know’
‘hard’
‘hyena’
‘lots’
‘a man’s name’
‘be dirty’
‘negative sufﬁx’

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

25

Kujamaat Jóola syllables are generally of the shape C(onsonant) V(owel),
although V, VC, CVC, and CVNC (where N represents any nasal) syllables occur as well. Vowels may be long or short. Stress is stem-initial.
The most salient feature of Kujamaat Jóola phonology is its pervasive
vowel harmony. Vowel harmony is the agreement among vowels in a
word with respect to a given feature, such as height, rounding, or
backness. We will explore Kujamaat Jóola vowel harmony in depth in
chapter 3. Until then, keep an eye out for how certain morphemes inﬂuence the shape of Kujamaat Jóola stems, and, more often, vice versa.

26

MORPHOLOGY

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

Exercises
1.

Create five new words – in English or your native language, if
different. Give their definitions if they are not obvious.

2.

Many product names are novel English forms coined by marketers.
Look at the following list of product names and make hypotheses
about how people came up with their names. Possibilities include,
but are not limited to, the following: (i) combination of elements
already occurring in English; (ii) combination of Latin or Greek
morphemes – even without knowing Latin or Greek, you might be
able to recognize a few; (iii) new use for a term already existing in
English; (iv) use of a proper name. This is meant to be a fun exercise,
ideally one to be discussed in class. It should not be graded.
a. pHisoderm A pH-balanced cleanser
b. Nescafé
Coffee made by Nestlé
c. Ajax
A strong household cleanser
d. Eucerin
Moisturizing lotion
e. Friskies
Cat food
f. Tums
Antacid tablets
g. Trident
Chewing gum
h. Life savers Hard candy shaped like a donut
i. Spam
Canned meat similar to ham

3.

New technology creates a need for new words. You may not consider the TV remote control new, but relative to other examples of
modern technology, it is. Besides “remote control,” it is called by
many other names. What do you call it? In class, compile a list
of words that your classmates and instructor use to refer to it.
Comment on the morphological form of the various words.

4.

Choose a language other than English. It may be one you know or
have studied, or one that you would like to learn more about by
using library resources. How are nouns marked for plural in that
language? Are they marked at all? Make a comprehensive list of
plural types in the language, with examples.

5.

We choose the example “Not me” and have it coming out of the
mouth of a child (someone unlikely to have been exposed to much
prescriptive grammar) on purpose. While some English speakers

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

may consider “Not I” to be more correct, many would agree that
“Not me” sounds more natural. Can you think of other instances
where “I” is considered to be more correct, at least by traditionalists, but where “me” sounds more natural, at least to you? What
does this have to do with morphology, in your opinion?
6.

Etymologically, the following words contain more than one morpheme. Break each of them up into its constituent morphemes, then
list at least one other word that contains each morpheme. When
identifying morphemes, it is always useful to identify other forms
that contain them, and this exercise is to encourage you to begin
doing so.
Example:
morphemic morph- amorphous, polymorphic, metamorphic
-emphoneme, hypoglycemia, academy
-ic
tonic, sonic, academic
a.
b.
c.
d.

monologue
predispose
receive
phonology

e.
f.
g.
h.

decline
television
circumscribe
bibliophile

7.

Rewrite the following forms and then separate them into morphemes using a slash or a hyphen. If a form consists of only one
morpheme, call it monomorphemic.
a. Danny
e. monkey
b. theorists
f. partnerships
c. multifaceted
g. hysterical
d. weather
h. children

8.

Should -ful be analyzed as one morpheme or two different morphemes (ful1 and ful2) in the following examples? Explain your answer
and bring in further examples if necessary.
a. wrathful
b. handful

9.

English noun and verb pairs
A. The following words can be used as nouns or verbs, but their
pronunciation changes accordingly. How? State your answer as

27

28

MORPHOLOGY

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

a generalization that contrasts the pronunciation of all the
nouns with that of the verbs.
a. import
g. transfer
b. contrast
h. convict
c. insult
i. project
d. insert
j. rebel
e. protest
k. conflict
f. convert
B. For many English speakers, the verb protest has two different
pronunciations. One fits the pattern that you identified in part
A as being characteristic of nouns; the other fits the pattern you
identified as being characteristic of verbs. If you are familiar
with the two pronunciations of the verb protest, first identify
the two possibilities, then come up with a hypothesis that
might explain their coexistence.
10.

English spit has two past tense forms: spit or spat. The second is
an example of ablaut, mentioned in the discussion of Principle 3.
What about the first? Should we analyze it as a single morpheme,
or as two morphemes, spit and Ø?

11.

Organize the following set of German nouns into singular–plural
pairs. Then determine the allomorphs of the plural ending. Ignore
changes in the stem vowel.
Väter
‘fathers’
Auge
‘eye’
Kinder ‘children’
Adler
‘eagle’
Pferd
‘horse’
Kind
‘child’
Männer ‘men’
Augen ‘eyes’
Vater
‘father’
Kuh
‘cow’
Mann
‘man’
Frauen ‘women’
Adler
‘eagles’
Auto
‘car’
Kühe
‘cows’
Autos ‘cars’
Pferde
‘horses’
Frau
‘woman’

12.

Etymologically, the following forms contain more than one morpheme. In your opinion, does your mental grammar treat them as such,
or does it treat them as monomorphemic forms? Deal with each
form separately, because your answer may not be the same for all.
Explain.
a. holocaust
b. parade
c. presence

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

13.

Zoque, Mexico (Nida 1965: 12)
List all morphemes and give the meaning of each.
pjn
‘man’
pjnta/m
‘men’
pjnkjsi
‘on a man’
pjnkotoya
‘for a man’
pjnhi/i
‘with a man’
pjnkjsita/m
‘on men’
pjnkjsizeh
‘as on a man’
pjnzeh
‘manlike’
pjnzehta/m
‘like men’
nanah
‘mother’
nanahta/m
‘mothers’
nanahkotoya
‘for a mother’
/unehi/i
‘with a child’
/unehi/ita/m
‘with children’
naka
‘skin, leather’
nakapit
‘by means of leather’
nakapitzeh
‘as if by leather’
yomo
‘woman’
yomota/m
‘women’
yomohi/i
‘with a woman’
yomotih
‘just a woman’
yomo/une
‘girl’
kahzi
‘hen’
kahzi/une
‘chick’
libru
‘book’
libru/une
‘booklet’
wetu
‘fox’
wetu/une
‘fox whelp’
te/ pjn
‘the man’
maiu te/ pjn
‘the man went’
‘the man goes’
maipa te/ pjn
maike/tpa te/ yomo
‘the woman also goes’
minpa te/ /une
‘the child comes’
minu te/ /une
‘the child came’
maike/tu
‘he also went’
maiutih
‘he went (and did nothing more)’

14.

Congo Swahili, Elisabethville dialect
A. Identify as many morphemes as possible and give the meaning
of each.

29

30

MORPHOLOGY

AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

B. Imagine that you have the opportunity to do fieldwork on
Congo Swahili. List a few sentences that you would elicit from
consultants that might enable you to confirm or complete your
morphological analysis.
Supplementary information:
a. The future -taka- and the negative -ta- are not related.
b. The final -a may be treated as a morpheme. Its meaning is not
indicated in this set.
c. The passive morpheme may be described as having two forms,
-iw- and -w-. Its form depends on what precedes it.
ninasema
wunasema
anasema
munasema
wanasema
ninapika
ninanupika
ninakupika
ninawapika
ananipika
ananupika
nilipika
nilimupika
nitakanupika
nitakapikiwa
ninaona
ninamupika
tunasema
wutakapikiwa
ninapikiwa
nilipikiwa
nilipikaka
wunapikizwa
wunanipikizwa
wutakanipikizwa
sitanupika
hatanupika
hatutanupika
hawatatupika

‘I speak’
‘you (sg) speak’
‘he speaks’
‘you (pl) speak’
‘they speak’
‘I hit’
‘I hit you (pl)’
‘I hit you (sg)’
‘I hit them’
‘he hits me’
‘he hits you (pl)’
‘I have hit’
‘I have hit him’
‘I will hit you (pl)’
‘I will be hit’
‘I see’
‘I hit him’
‘we speak’
‘you (sg) will be hit’
‘I am hit’
‘I have been hit’
‘I hit (remote time)’
‘you (sg) cause being hit’
‘you (sg) cause me to be hit’
‘you (sg) will cause me to be hit’
‘I do not hit you (pl)’
‘he does not hit you (pl)’
‘we do not hit you (pl)’
‘they do not hit us’

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

31

NOTES
1 Conveniently, it also blended the ﬁrst names of the two owners, Renee and
Bob.
2 We thank Krin Gabbard for the etymology of rebop.
3 Nida has six principles; we present four here.
4 The Kujamaat Jóola data presented here comes almost exclusively from
J. David Sapir’s 1965 grammar, A Grammar of Diola-Fogny. We also used Sapir
(1970, 1975; Thomas and Sapir 1967), Hopkins (1990), and Gero and Levinsohn
(1993).
5 We choose to present the Kujamaat Jóola data in the transcription systems
used by Sapir because being able to deal with different transcription systems
is an essential skill for all linguists. Elsewhere in this book, we will generally
use IPA transcription unless otherwise indicated.
6 In subsequent chapters nasal–consonant clusters will be written <nj>,
<nc>, <ng>, and <nk>, respectively, following Sapir. In other words, we do
not represent assimilation in place of the nasal to the following consonant
(e.g., we write /nk/ for phonetic [èk]).

