What is Morphology?
Mark Aronoff and
Kirsten Fudeman

1

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS

1 Thinking about Morphology and
Morphological Analysis

1.1 What is Morphology?
1.2 Morphemes
1.3 Morphology in Action
1.3.1 Novel words and word play
1.3.2 Abstract morphological facts
1.4 Background and Beliefs
1.5 Introduction to Morphological Analysis
1.5.1 Two basic approaches: analysis and synthesis
1.5.2 Analytic principles
1.5.3 Sample problems with solutions
1.6 Summary
Introduction to Kujamaat Jóola

1
2
4
4
6
9
12
12
14
17
21
22

mor·phol·o·gy: a study of the structure or form of something
Merriam-Webster Unabridged

n 1.1 What is Morphology?
The term morphology is generally attributed to the German poet, novelist,
playwright, and philosopher Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832),
who coined it early in the nineteenth century in a biological context. Its
etymology is Greek: morph- means ‘shape, form’, and morphology is the
study of form or forms. In biology morphology refers to the study of the
form and structure of organisms, and in geology it refers to the study of
the conﬁguration and evolution of land forms. In linguistics morphology
refers to the mental system involved in word formation or to the branch

2

MM
OR
O PRH
PH
OO
LO
LO
GG
Y Y A NAD
N DM M
O ROPRHP O
H LOO
LG
O IGCI A
CL
ALAN
AN
AA
LY
LY
S ISSI S

of linguistics that deals with words, their internal structure, and how
they are formed.

n 1.2 Morphemes
A major way in which morphologists investigate words, their internal
structure, and how they are formed is through the identiﬁcation and study
of morphemes, often deﬁned as the smallest linguistic pieces with a grammatical function. This deﬁnition is not meant to include all morphemes,
but it is the usual one and a good starting point. A morpheme may consist
of a word, such as hand, or a meaningful piece of a word, such as the -ed
of looked, that cannot be divided into smaller meaningful parts. Another
way in which morphemes have been deﬁned is as a pairing between sound
and meaning. We have purposely chosen not to use this deﬁnition. Some
morphemes have no concrete form or no continuous form, as we will see,
and some do not have meanings in the conventional sense of the term.
You may also run across the term morph. The term ‘morph’ is sometimes used to refer speciﬁcally to the phonological realization of a
morpheme. For example, the English past tense morpheme that we spell
-ed has various morphs. It is realized as [t] after the voiceless [p] of jump
(cf. jumped), as [d] after the voiced [l] of repel (cf. repelled), and as [@d] after
the voiceless [t] of root or the voiced [d] of wed (cf. rooted and wedded).
We can also call these morphs allomorphs or variants. The appearance
of one morph over another in this case is determined by voicing and the
place of articulation of the ﬁnal consonant of the verb stem.
Now consider the word reconsideration. We can break it into three
morphemes: re-, consider, and -ation. Consider is called the stem. A stem is
a base morpheme to which another morphological piece is attached. The
stem can be simple, made up of only one part, or complex, itself made up
of more than one piece. Here it is best to consider consider a simple stem.
Although it consists historically of more than one part, most present-day
speakers would treat it as an unanalyzable form. We could also call consider
the root. A root is like a stem in constituting the core of the word to which
other pieces attach, but the term refers only to morphologically simple
units. For example, disagree is the stem of disagreement, because it is the base
to which -ment attaches, but agree is the root. Taking disagree now, agree is
both the stem to which dis- attaches and the root of the entire word.
Returning now to reconsideration, re- and -ation are both afﬁxes, which
means that they are attached to the stem. Afﬁxes like re- that go before
the stem are preﬁxes, and those like -ation that go after are sufﬁxes.

MM
OR
n 1.3 Morphology in Action
We would like to explore the idea of morphology more deeply by
examining some data. These are examples of morphology in action –
morphological facts of everyday life.

n 1.3.1 Novel words and word play
If you had been walking down the street in Ithaca, New York, a few
years ago, you might have looked up and seen a sign for the music store
“Rebop,” a name that owes its inspiration to the jazz term rebop.1 Rebop
was originally one of the many nonsense expressions that jazz musicians
threw into their vocal improvisations, starting in the early 1920s. In the
1940s, rebop became interchangeable with bebop, a term of similar origin,
as the term for the rhythmically and harmonically eccentric music
played by young black musicians. By the 1950s the name of this musical
style was quite ﬁrmly established as simply bop.2 Today, the original use
of rebop is known only to cognoscenti, so that most people who pass
by the store will be likely to interpret the word as composed of the
word bop and the preﬁx re-, which means approximately ‘again’. This
preﬁx can attach only to verbs, so we must interpret bop as a verb here.
Rebop must therefore mean ‘bop again’, if it means anything at all.
And this music store, appropriately, specialized in selling used CDs.
There’s something going on here with English morphology. Of course,
rebop is not a perfectly well-formed English word. The verb bop means
something like ‘bounce’, but the preﬁx re- normally attaches only to a
verb whose meaning denotes an accomplishment. The verb rebop therefore makes little sense. But names of stores and products are designed
to catch the consumer’s attention, not necessarily to make sense, and
this one does so by exploiting people’s knowledge of English in a fairly
complex way and breaking the rules so as to attract attention, as verbal
art often does.
Consider now the following phrases, taken from a Toni Braxton song:
Unbreak my heart, uncry these tears.
We have never seen anyone unbreak something, and you certainly can’t
uncry tears, but every English speaker can understand these words. We
all know what it means to unbreak somebody’s heart or to wish that
one’s heart were unbroken. If we asked somebody, “unbreak my heart,”
we would be asking them to reverse the process of having our heart

